[docs] Add a guide on Expo Go -> dev builds (#37197)
expo/expo: docs/pages/develop/development-builds/expo-go-to-dev-build.mdx

---
title: Convert from Expo Go to a development build
sidebar_title: Expo Go to development build
description: How to migrate your Expo Go project to use development builds
---

import { ContentSpotlight } from '~/ui/components/ContentSpotlight';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

> To migrate from Expo Go to a development build, you'll need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To migrate from Expo Go to a development build, you'll need to follow the steps below:
```

Let's add this context to clarify there are multiple steps.

<Step label="1">

## Install the `expo-dev-client`

> The Expo Dev Client library includes the launcher UI (shown in the screenshots below), dev menu, extensions to test updates, and more. The Expo Go app has the dev menu built in, and that's why you need to install it separately for a development build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Expo Dev Client library includes the launcher UI (shown in the screenshots below), dev menu, extensions to test over-the-air updates, and more. The Expo Go app has the dev menu built in, and that's why you need to install it separately for a development build.
```

Let's expand updates part to be specific about what updates are here in the context of a dev client and to avoid confusion.

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-dev-client']} />

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="expo-dev-client launcher and menu UIs on Android and iOS."
  src="/static/images/dev-client/preview.png"
  caption={`When you run a development build it will look like this, only with your app name and icon included rather than "Microfoam". The launcher UI is pictured in iOS on the left and Android on the right. In between, you can see an app running inside of the development build, with the customizable developer menu open.`}
/>

> > We recommend using the `expo-dev-client` for the best development experience, but it is possible to use development builds without installing this library. If not using the dev client, in [Step 3](/develop/development-builds/expo-go-to-dev-build/#start-the-dev-client) start the bundler with `--dev-client`. Otherwise it will default to opening in Expo Go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We recommend using the `expo-dev-client` for the best development experience, but it is possible to use development builds without installing this library. If not using the dev client, in [Step 3](/develop/development-builds/expo-go-to-dev-build/#start-the-dev-client), start the bundler with `--dev-client`. Otherwise, it will default to opening in Expo Go.
```

</Step>

<Step label="2">

## Build your native app

> With Expo Go, we only needed to build the JavaScript bundle, but with development builds we also need to compile the native app. With Expo, there is two parts to building your native app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Expo Go, you only needed to build the JavaScript bundle, but with development builds you also need to compile the native app. With Expo, there are two parts to building your native app:
```

> 1. generate the native `/ios` and/or `/android` directories ([read more](/develop/development-builds/expo-go-to-dev-build/#cng-and-prebuild) on when and how you'll need to do this)
> 2. use native build tools to compile the native app(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Generate the native **android** and/or **ios** directories ([read more](/develop/development-builds/expo-go-to-dev-build/#cng-and-prebuild) on when and how you'll need to do this)
2. Use native build tools to compile the native app(s)
```

Let's use the platform order as per our writing style guide:https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#platform-order-when-referencing-android-ios-and-web-or-multiple-platforms

> Once you've built your native app, you won't need to build it again unless you add or update a library with native code, or change any native coding such as the app name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've built your native app, you won't need to build it again unless you add or update a library with native code, or change any native code or configuration, such as the app name.
```

> > After generating your `/ios` and/or `/android` directories, make sure you add them to `.gitignore` instead of checking them into Git. This ensures you can always regenerate the code locally or on CI when needed and never have to edit native code manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> After generating your **android** and/or **ios** directories, make sure you add them to **.gitignore** instead of checking them into Git. This ensures you can always regenerate the code locally or on CI when needed and never have to edit native code manually.
```

### Option 1: Build on your local machine

> To build a native app on your local machine, follow the guide on [setting up your local development environment](https://reactnative.dev/docs/set-up-your-environment) for which ever platform you're looking to build for. This involves setting up and configuring native build tools like Xcode for iOS, and Android Studio for Android.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build a native app on your local machine, follow the setup your environment guides for [Android](/workflow/android-studio-emulator/) and [iOS](/workflow/ios-simulator/) platforms. This involves setting up and configuring native build tools like Android Studio for Android and Xcode for iOS.
```

Let's link to the guides from our docs instead of React Native instead of React Native doc.

> Once you have everything set up, run the following command to build for iOS:
> 
> <Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:ios']} />
> 
> Or to build the Android app:
> 
> <Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:android']} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have everything set up, run the following command to build for Android:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:android']} />

Or to build for iOS:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:ios']} />
```

Let's use the`Tab` component here.

By default this will build and install the app on a simulator/emulator. If you need to run the build on your phone, plug it into your computer (trust device and allow USB debugging if prompted) and run the above commands with the `--device` flag.

### Option 2: Build on EAS

Building on EAS servers is useful when:

- you can't or don't want to set up your local development environment
- you want to build an iOS app but don't own a Mac
- you want to share the development builds with your team

> To build on EAS, install the EAS CLI and log in:
> 
> <Terminal cmd={['$ npm install -g eas-cli && eas login']} />
> 
> To build the development client for Android, run:
> 
> <Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --platform android --profile development']} />
> 
> To build the development client for iOS (this requires an Apple Developer Account), run:
> 
> <Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --platform ios --profile development']} />
> 
> See the [next guide](/develop/development-builds/create-a-build) for details on various ways to build your dev client and the limitations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build on EAS, install the EAS CLI and log in:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npm install -g eas-cli && eas login']} />

To build the development client for Android, run:

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --platform android --profile development']} />

To build the development client for iOS (this requires an Apple Developer Account), run:

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --platform ios --profile development']} />

See the [next guide](/develop/development-builds/create-a-build) for details on various ways to build your dev client and the limitations.
```

For this, let's use a BoxLink to link to the next page and briefly add the context here on what different ways a user can expect to create a build with EAS on this page: https://docs.expo.dev/develop/development-builds/create-a-build/.  I don't think we need to repeat the information in this guide.

</Step>

<Step label="2">

> ## Start the JavaScript bundler

Author: I recon both are correct. I only used JS because I was thinking "JS vs Native" and Metro is just the name of the bundler, but I can change to Metro.

The building locally, `npx expo run:<platform>` will start the bundler automatically. But if you closed the bundler or are working on a dev client you build earlier, (re)start the JavaScript bundler with:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo start']} />

When your project has `expo-dev-client` installed, the bundler will print out **Using development build**, and the QR code it shows will link into the development build you created instead of Expo Go.

</Step>

## Prebuild

**Prebuild** is a concept unique to managed Expo projects. It refers to the process of generating the `/ios` and `/android` directories based on your local config and properties.

### When **not** to run prebuild

> All Expo build tools (`eas build` and `npx expo run:<platform>`) will **prebuild** automatically if no existing native folders are found. This means that there is no need to run prebuild manually when running `eas build` or when you're running `npx expo run:<platform>` for the first time.

Reviewer 2: To me "when not to" reads like "when you shouldn't" but this is more like "don't need to", but running is still fine. Maybe the wording could be tweaked a bit?

It maybe better to emphasize when to run prebuild first, and add this one as a paragraph at the end since this part isn't that important.

### When should you run prebuild

> The only reason to prebuild locally is if you are building via `npx expo run:<platform>` and change any native dependencies (e.g. installing a new library or changing the native config). Then you'll want to rebuild the native directory with:

Reviewer 2: I'd remove "only", since there are multiple reasons here.

Reviewer 2: I usually find it easier to read if there are bullet points, like:

```
You will need to run prebuild locally if you are building via `npx expo run:<platform>` and change any native dependencies or configuration, such as:

- Installing or updating a library containing native code
- Changing `app.json` or `app.config.json`
- Upgrade Expo SDK version
- etc.
```

### Option 1: Build on your local machine

To build a native app on your local machine, follow the setup your environment guides for [Android](/workflow/android-studio-emulator/) and [iOS](/workflow/ios-simulator/) platforms. This involves setting up and configuring native build tools like Android Studio for Android and Xcode for iOS.

Once you have everything set up, run the following command:

<Tabs>

<Tab label="Build for Android">

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:android']} />

</Tab>

<Tab label="Build for iOS">

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:ios']} />

</Tab>
</Tabs>

By default, this will build and install the app on an Android Emulator/iOS Simulator. If you need to run the build on your phone, plug it into your computer (trust device and allow USB debugging if prompted, and on iOS enable [developer mode](https://docs.expo.dev/get-started/set-up-your-environment/?mode=development-build&buildEnv=local&platform=ios&device=physical#plug-in-your-device-via-usb-and-enable-developer-mode)) and run the above commands with the `--device` flag.

### Option 2: Build on EAS

Building on EAS servers is useful when:

> - you can't or don't want to set up your local development environment
> - you want to build an iOS app but don't own a Mac
> - you want to share the development builds with your team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can't or don't want to set up your local development environment
- You want to build an iOS app but don't own a Mac
- You want to share the development builds with your team
```

<BoxLink
  title="Build on EAS"
  description="How to create your Development Build on EAS"
  href="/develop/development-builds/create-a-build/"
  Icon={BookOpen02Icon}
/>

</Step>

<Step label="2">

## Start the bundler

> After building locally, `npx expo run:android:ios` will start the bundler automatically. But if you closed the bundler or are working on a dev client you built earlier, (re)start the Metro bundler with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After building locally, `npx expo run:android|ios` will start the bundler automatically. But if you closed the bundler or are working on a dev client you built earlier, (re)start the Metro bundler with:
```

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo start']} />

When your project has `expo-dev-client` installed, the bundler will print out **Using development build**, and the QR code it shows will link into the development build you created instead of Expo Go.

</Step>

## Prebuild

[**Prebuild** ](/workflow/continuous-native-generation/#prebuild) is a concept unique to Expo projects. It refers to the process of generating the **android** and **ios** directories based on your local configuration and properties.

### When should you run prebuild

You will need to run prebuild locally if you are building via `npx expo run:android|ios`, and change any native dependencies or configuration, such as:

- Installing or updating a library containing native code

> - Changing `app.json` or `app.config.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Changing [app config](/workflow/configuration/)(`app.json`)
```

Let's link to the app config page and reference it this way as [per our writing style guide](https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#referencing-appjsonappconfigjsonappconfigjsappconfigts)

- Upgrading your Expo SDK version

> In these cases, you'll want to rebuild the native directory with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these cases, you'll want to rebuild the native directories with:
```
